So this video, we want to look at: nested loops,
labels, break, and continue statements
a little more closely.
And just look at things a little bit out of the ordinary
when dealing with loops.
Firstly: you cannot reference a label with the continue,
or break statements that is not in the loops scope.
You'll get a compiler error if that happens.
An outer loop cannot reference the inner loop's labels,
but an inner loop can reference the outer loop's labels.
You can break out of a nested loop from a nested loop.
You can also completely break out of the parent loop,
from the nested loop.
Alright, so let's create a new class in our loops project.
We're going to go with "ForLoopExample2" as the name.
Now this code has an outer for loop
which has a label called OUTER_LABEL,
as you can see on screen there.
There's a nested for loop which has a label called
INNER_LABEL, also on screen.
The outer loop iterates through the i variable
for a maximum of five iterations;
so i equals zero, one, two, three, four.
The inner loop iterates through the j variable
for a maximum of three times;
j equals zero, one, and two.
The outer loop has a continue statement,
which you can see there
on line twenty.
That's the first iteration of the loop
we're actually testing for there.
The inner loop demonstrates a continue
of the inner loop,
and you can see we've got a continuation
of the inner label there on line 28.
It also demonstrates a break on the inner loop,
you can see that on line 33.
We're also demonstrating a break on the outer loop,
there's break OUTER_LABEL.
So if you run this,
alright so there's the output
as you can see on the screen there.
So let's talk about that
and I'll show you some code at the same time.
So let's about each iteration here.
So the first iteration, i = 0 of the outer loop,
i obviously equals zero,
well that's gonna execute the continue statement
and that's because we're doing a test
for i of having the value of 0 on line 18.
So it hits the continue statement,
referencing the OUTER_LABEL
so that all code blocks below this statement
are skipped,
including the entire nested loop.
And we can see that in the output on the screen.
So moving down, the next iteration
goes into the nested loop.
And when j = 0, executes the continue statement,
referencing the INNER_LABEL
so the j loop continues,
skipping any code
below the continue in the nested loop
just for the j = 0 iteration.
And you can see that in the output
for our iteration one,
because there's on j = 0 LAST,
we've got j = 0 FIRST, j = 0 CONTINUE INNER_LABEL,
then it goes to j = 0 1 FIRST.
So moving on down,
look at iteration i = 2.
Well this goes into the nested loop
and when j = 1,
and you can see the if statement there on line 30,
i = 2 and j = 1,
at that point it executes the break,
and we can see that in the output
right at the bottom of the output pane.
Right, so moving on down then,
i = 3,
this goes into the nested loop,
and when j = 2,
and there's the if test on line 35,
it breaks, or rather it executes the break statement
referencing the outer label.
So even though the break is in the nested loop,
the outer loop terminates here.
We can see this, we've got:
j = 0, j = 1, j = 2 FIRST, j = 2 BREAK OUTER LABEL,
OUTSIDE OF LOOPS: 3, j = 2 and basically it terminates.
Alright, I'll close that.
Now, in the next example I'm gonna post
we're gonna test postfix
and prefix increment unary operators in our for loops,
a common theme in exam questions.
So, we're gonna call a method in all three sections
of the for loop declaration,
and explore what happens if something goes wrong
in each of these declaration blocks:
the initialization, termination, and increment.
So I've got to create another class,
we'll call this one "ForLoopExample3".
Okay,
now this class has a method,
which you can see on line 11,
which throws an exception conditionally.
In the first example we're calling this method
in the for loop initialization block.
And you can see that we've got that on line 25.
So if I actually run this code;
observe here that the variable i
was never incremented.
The for loop condition is only evalutated
after the initialization section is completed
for the first iteration of the loop.
Right, so what we'll do is we'll change the for loop
and move our method to the conditional section
of the for loop.
Let's go ahead and do that,
so we're gonna change the call there, the for loop.
I'm gonna change this to for,
put i = 0 semicolon,
then we'll put interruptIt,
parentheses
++i,
we'll check that that's less than 10,
then we'll leave the third component as is.
So it's for i = 0,
interruptIt parentheses ++i < 10 and i++.
So if we actually run this now;
so we're gonna see what's happened here,
the unary prefix increment operator did occur this time,
but our loop still hasn't executed even a single iteration
because of the error we introduced
in the conditional section.
And again, just to confirm,
we're actually executing this method on line 11,
and throwing an exception.
Alright, so let's continue.
We'll actually move, or change, the for loop again
so we've got for i = 0,
we're gonna change this slightly,
now it's going to be ++i < 10 semicolon
then we're going to put interruptIt
i++
and we need another parentheses here.
Alright, so basically we've moved our method call
now to increment section of the for loop.
If we actually run the code,
we can see now that our loop has executed once
and the increment section was being executed
after this iteration, when the exception occurred,
interrupting the for loop processing from continuing.
So this example demonstrated
in what instance and order,
each of the for loop declaration blocks was executed:
the initialization block is executed only once,
prior to the loop termination condition
being evaluated for the first time;
the loop termination condition is evaluated prior
to each loop iteration;
and thirdly, the increment is executed after the iteration,
prior to the next loop termination condition evaluation.
Alright, so let's finish the video here
and we'll move onto a quiz in the next video.